# Solution to Challenges

### Challenge #1
```
Given that the current encoding of line information is wasteful of memory, devise an encoding that compresses the line information 
for a series of instructions on the same line. Change writeChunk() to write this compressed form, and implement a getLine()
function that, given the index of an instruction, determines the line where the instruction occurs.
```
### Solution #1
Our previous implementation of line information consisted of storing a separate array of integers, `lines` that parallels the bytecode. 
Each number in the `lines` array is the line number for the corresponding byte in the bytecode. When a runtime error occurs, we look up
the line number at the same index as the current instruction’s offset in the bytecode array.

For example, the line information for the bytecode, `OP_RETURN`, at index 5 in the bytecode array could be found by simply looking
up `lines[5]`. 

To increase the efficiency of memory, a new imeplementation consists of storing line information into a dynamic 2D array.
Each element in the 2D array is a subarray that holds two pieces of information - the number of bytes (index 0) that correspond to the
line number (index 1). An example element could be `[5, 2]` which means that 5 bytes were emited from the second line of the source code.
This is far more efficient than our prior implementation that would correspond to 5 entries of `2` into the `lines` array `[..2, 2, 2, 2, 2, ...]`

Initializing the new line fields in `initChunk()`
```c++
chunk->lines = NULL;
chunk->linesCapacity = 0;
chunk->linesCount = 0;
```

The `writeChunk()` method is updated to add a new entry into the dynamic 2D array whenever a new line numnber is encountered. 
```c++
// New Line into 2D Line Array
chunk->lines[chunk->linesCount] = NULL;
chunk->lines[chunk->linesCount] = GROW_ARRAY(int, chunk->lines[chunk->linesCount], 0, 2);
chunk->lines[chunk->linesCount][0] = 1;
chunk->lines[chunk->linesCount][1] = line; 
chunk->linesCount++;
```
In `writeChunk()`, For a line that already exists, the 0th index of the element that holds the inforamtion for that line is updated. For example, 
that would be mean that the 5 in `[5, 2]` would be updated to `[6, 2]`.
```c++
chunk->lines[chunk->linesCount-1][0]++;
```
Finally, a new `getLine()` function is implemented that gets the line information from the new 2D array given the index of the byte in the byetecode 
sequence.

```c++
int getLine(Chunk* chunk, int byteIndex) {
	for (int i = 0; i < chunk->linesCount; i++) {
		if (byteIndex < chunk->lines[i][0]) { return chunk->lines[i][1]; }
	}
	return 0;
} 
```
All changes made for this challenge can be found [here](https://github.com/JanatB/Bytecode-Virtual-Machine/commit/305cb1196aaf67a97db193c1499116d1e43ec9a8) 

### Challenge #2 
```
Many instruction sets feature multiple instructions that perform the same operation but with operands of different sizes. 
Leave our existing one-byte OP_CONSTANT instruction alone, and define a second OP_CONSTANT_LONG instruction. It stores the operand
as a 24-bit number, which should be plenty.
```
### Solution #2 

The solution consists of implementing a new function to write off the `OP_CONSTANT_LONG` instruction to the bytecode array when the number of constants exceed 256. 
```c++
static void writeConstant(Chunk* chunk, Value value, int line) {
	uint32_t constantIndex = (uint32_t)addConstant(chunk, value);
	if (constantIndex > THREE_BYTE_MAX) {
		error("Too many constants in one chunk. Maximum allowed are 2^24.");
		return 0;
	}

	uint8_t byteArr[3];
	uint8_t* x = (uint8_t*)&constantIndex;
	byteArr[0] = x[0]; // LSB
	byteArr[1] = x[1];
	byteArr[2] = x[2]; // MSB

	emitBytes(OP_CONSTANT_LONG, byteArr[0]);
	emitBytes(byteArr[1], byteArr[2]);
}
```
The function adds the value for the constant into the chunk's constant array and then proceeds to check if the number of constants currently in the chunk (indicative by `constantIndex`) is greater than `THREE_BYTE_MAX` which simply equals the maximum value that 3 bytes can hold - 2^24. If it isn't, then we proceed to seperate the returned `constantIndex` into 3 bytes and seperately write those 3 bytes off into the chunk's code array. Note: We cannot have directly added the constantIndex to the chunk's code array since it is of size `uint32_t` and the code array only holds values that are of type `uint8_t` - therefore, it is necessary to break it up. 

Implementing additional functionality for the `OP_CONSTANT_LONG` instruction happens in the disassembler. The following function is added with its implementation removed and replaced wtih comments that summarize the functionality:
```c++
static int constantLongInstruction(const char* name, Chunk* chunk, int offset) {
	// Get the 3 byte index
	// Convert the 3 byte index into binary
	// Concatenate the binary values and convert to a decimal integer (the index)
	// Print the result
	// Return the offset
}
```
And finally, the virtual machine is updated to ensure that it can properly interpret `OP_CONSTANT_LONG` instructions
```c++
case OP_CONSTANT_LONG: {
	Value constant = READ_CONSTANT();
	push(constant);
	break;
```
and 
```c++
int offset = (int)(vm.ip - vm.chunk->code);
int prevInstruc = vm.chunk->code[offset - 2];
if (prevInstruc == OP_CONSTANT_LONG) {
	// Since the OP_CONSTANT_LONG has a 3 byte opperand 
	// We've already read one of the opperands so we skip the 2 to get to the next instruction
	vm.ip += 2; 
}
```
All changes made for this challenge can be found [here](https://github.com/JanatB/Bytecode-Virtual-Machine/commit/dbb94abe3505c55f66cb669f4a02a04d0ad84b20) 

### Challenge #3 
```
Our reallocate() function relies on the C standard library for dynamic memory allocation and freeing. malloc() and free() 
aren’t magic. Find a couple of open source implementations of them and explain how they work. How do they keep track of 
which bytes are allocated and which are free? What is required to allocate a block of memory? Free it? How do they make 
that efficient? What do they do about fragmentation?
```
### Solution #3 

The implementations of `malloc`, `calloc` and `free` mainly rely on either the `sbrk/brk` or `mmap` system calls in a UNIX system (`VirtualAlloc` for Windows). The system call `void *sbrk(intptr_t increment);` moves the program break by *increment* amount of bytes. 

What is the program break? Processes have their own virtual address space - an address space the OS makes available for them to use. This virtual address space consists of both mapped and unmapped memory addresses. Mapped memory regions, unlike unmapped, are addresses that have been mapped to physical memory. The translation of an unmapped memory address to a mapped one happens dynamically through the Memory Management Unit (MMU) of the system. 

This virtual address space is divided into several regions to hold the process’s stack, code, constants, globals, local variables, and heap. The program’s heap is what we are concerned about as that is where dynamic memory allocation is supported. 

The boundary separating the heap’s mapped and unmapped memory regions is the system break point. As malloc is used to request some memory, the system break point is moved to enlarge the mapped region - effectively allocating more memory dynamically.   

To keep track of which bytes of memory are allocated and which are free, a few implementations have a field in the headers of the block that contains that information.

A few implementations fuse together free contiguous blocks of memory into one larger block of memory. If it is found that an allocated block of memory has internal fragmentation enough to fit in another block of memory, the original block is split up.  

[Here](https://github.com/JanatB/Memory-Allocator) is a simple implementation of `malloc`, `realloc` and `free` 
